

WRF Generic Vortex in Shear Initialization README file.

Revised by Dave Nolan 10/23/2017, with contributions to the code from
Matt Onderlinde and Craig Mattocks.


The code does essentially four things:

1) It generates, on an axisymmetric grid, a wind field that looks like
a tropical cyclone, and the pressure and temperature fields that hold
this vortex in hydrostatic and gradient wind balance.

2) A mean zonal background flow U(y,z) can be prescribed.  If you are
using the balanced shear option (hereafter referred to as "real shear"),
the temperature and pressure anomalies, relative to a specified sounding
are computed that would hold this wind flow in geostrophic and hydrostatic
balance.  If you are using the "point-downscaling" option (more below),
then a single sounding is prescribed everywhere across the domain.

3) The axisymmetric fields are interpolated onto a 3D cartesian grid
in height coordinates. The axisymmetric wind fields are added to the
background wind fields, while the axisymmetric temperature and pressure
anomalies are recast as perturbations from a basic state, and then these
perturbations are added to the background temperature and pressure fields.

4) The fields are then written to a file which has a format specified in
the end of the sheargeneric.f code. This format was created by Shu-hua
Chen of UC Davis, and it can be read into a modified version of the 3D
supercell idealized WRF case.

To make it work, you compile the code using "make" (which uses "Makefile",
and may need to be adjusted to your computer and compiler). Then you
run it using "shg".

To get a sense of the inputs that you can control, look at the long list
of parameters that are defined near the top of the program sheargeneric.f.


The Test Case:

The code it set up to initialize a test case, which is a weak, low-level,
tropical-storm like vortex that is embedded in 5 m/s of easterly flow
with 5 m/s of westerly shear on top of it. The code is set to work with
the point-downscaling option (wind shear without temperature gradient,
doubly-periodic boundary conditions).  This vortex should move to the
west, develop convection, and intensify into a hurricane in a few days.


The Vortex:

The code creates the initial wind field based on the formula of a
"modified Rankine vortex," where you can specify the size, strength, and
decay rate of the wind field. It currently creates a vortex with RMW of
90km, Vmax 20 m/s, and decay rate a = 0.4. After a day or so the vortex
will adjust to some smaller, more intense structure. Note that the decay
rate of the initial wind field has a large influence on the future size
of the inner core wind field, with broader initial wind fields (lower a)
leading to larger storms.

Alternatively, the radial structure of the vortex can be defined by the
initial vorticity profile of the surface wind field, which is defined
in smoothvort.f.  In this case, the surface wind profile is created in
makevtbar.f by radially integrating this vorticity profile.

The wind profile is extended into the vertical by the subroutine
makevtofrz.f. These are just simple analytical functions which make the
vortex decay with height in a somewhat realistic way. There is also
a line which allows you to "cut off" the wind field so that it goes
quickly to zero beyond some radius (rcut).

The initial background sounding is now defined in a file called
"sounding.input". You can see some versions of these in the directory
"Soundings/". Wind profiles are also in the sounding files, and they
can be used, or replaced with idealized with profiles (more below).

Then the code finds the pressure and temperature fields through an
iterative approach: p(r,z) is found by integrating the gradient wind
equation inward from the outer boundary; then the hydrostatic equation
is enforced at each grid point by modifying the temperature. By repeating
these steps, the solution converges quite quickly.

I've also left copies of other initialization codes that I have used in
the past.  They are the "cat1," "cat3," and "gaussian" vortices from the
paper Nolan and Montgomery (2002), Also present is the hurricane-like
vortex used in the study of wavenumber-one instabilities in the paper
Nolan et al. (2001), indicated by the appendage "waveone."

The location of the initial vortex on the outer grid is set in the
variables ivort and jvort.

Note that you can only specify the vortex on the resolution of the
outermost WRF grid. Therefore, it is best to set the size of the vortex
(the radius of maximum winds) as a multiple of the grid spacing. In
this test case, the grid size is 18 km, so the RMW should be 54, or 72,
or 90 km, etc.


The Background Flow:

A new option is the ability to read in the wind profiles from a file. In
fact, this is the default: The reference sounding T(z) and q(z) are
defined in a file "sounding.input", along with the wind profiles U(z)
and V(z). However, you can choose an option to replace the U and V
data with idealized profiles from functions in the code. To do this,
set idealwinds=1.  Note that idealized U(z) is defined in makeuofyz.f,
while V(z) is defined within the main program sheargeneric.f.

If you look at the flags at the top of the program sheargeneric.f, you
will see that there are several ways you can handle the background flow
and/or wind shear.  If you do not use the point-downscaling technique, the
code will compute the T(y,z) and P(y,z) that hold U(y,z) in balance. If
you do use point downscaling, this will be ignored and the sounding will
be the same across the domain.

In this case, however, you must use the "pert_Corilois" = true option
in the WRF namelist. Doubly periodic boundary conditions (periodic in
y as well as x) must also be used.

For balanced shear cases, you must use pert_Coriolis = false and
periodic_y = false, symmetric_ys = true, symmetric_ye = true (on outermost
domain). Note also you cannot have any mean meridional flow with real
shear, i.e., V(z) must be zero.

When using real shear, you can also choose the f-plane or the beta-plane.
Make sure not to use beta-plane with point-downscaling.

After using "make" to compile, the executable is "shg".

Almost every variable for the axisymmetric vortex and the balanced
shear flow are now written to files in ASCII format, (e.g., tofrz.out,
rhofyz.out) so that you can read them into Matlab or IDR and look at
them easily.

After running "shg", move all 4 "input_sounding" files into the directory
where you will run ideal.exe and wrf.exe.

