

The Generic Vortex/Point-Downscaling Initialization for WRF

by Dave Nolan

with help over the years from Shu-hua Chen, Craig Mattocks, Matt Onderlinde,
and James Hlywiak


Updated December 2020 for WRF Version 4.2.1


The code in these directories contain the modifications needed to
simulate an idealized moving hurricane in WRF4.2.1. You can use this
code to perform simulations with mean flow and/or wind shear balanced
by temperature gradients, or using the "point-downscaling" technique of
Nolan (2011, J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst.).

This code contains a test case that is explained further in the "init"
directory in (6) below. You should be able to easily build your own
initial conditions from the test case.

Note that this updated code also contains files and instructions
for doing Time-Varying Point Downscaling (TVPDS). This framework
is included as an add-on to PDS. The codes and a separate README
file are in the TVPDS directory. You should install, test, and understand
PDS before moving on to TVPDS.

For PDS, I suggest the following steps:

1) Copy the files in each of the share, phys, dyn_em, and Registry
directories into the WRF directories of the same name. Make copies of
the original files, and then copy these modified versions into their
namesake files.

In previous versions of this system, it was required to modify the WRF
code itself on a case-by-case basis in order to do simulations with
"point downscaling" which is the same as "Coriolis force acting on the
perturbation winds." However, this trick is now available in WRF as a
run-time option in the namelist.input file.

2) Use "clean -a" to erase all compiled code, then do "configure".
If you plan to use moving nests, choose the option to do so.

3) Compile WRF. (You need to recompile from scratch if you want to
incorporate my recommended changes to the Registry files.)

4) Copy the contents of the WRF run directory into the place you want
to run WRF. Then copy the provided namelist.input files in the namelist
directory into the same directory.

5) Make copies or links of main/ideal.exe and main/wrf.exe in your
run directory.

6) Go into the init directory, read the README file, compile the code
and run.

7) Move the four input_sounding files into your run directory.

8) Run ideal.exe to make the wrfinput_d01 from the input_sounding files.
You may want to examine the wrfinput_d01 to see if it looks right.

9) Run WRF.

10) Examine output in netcdf format.


Good luck!

Dave Nolan


